Okay. I sort of know the answer to this question already because you made it kind of plain,
but just for the listeners on the show. The alien races that are contacted the songs,
you portrayed all of these people, you know, civilizations, galaxies away being destroyed.
And then you let Lou and Sue know that. Wouldn't that cause a futility in their quest, you
know, where they're going to unite the earth and go for the stars? If they know that any
civilization even that advance is going to end.
Well, yes and no, I suppose. I mean, that is the existential position of all people,
really, and the timeframe of talking about it's millions of years. Well, everybody already
knows that the lifespan of the universe of the sun or whatever is finite. I didn't want it to be a
bunny rabbit story. And that is why I put that in there. I mean, it kills, you know,
it kills Parker. He can't take it. They can. That because they can deal with that existential
reality as those other civilizations could. Okay. This is sort of a general question.
It refers to songs from the stars, but also your other works. In the way you treat the
media. I think almost every novel you've read is had something to do with the media.
I take it that you would be having an ambivalent attitude toward the use of the media. If it's
done properly, it's great. If it's used for the wrong kind of power, it's bad. Like Sue, for
instance, uses it to sort of make a media hype, you know, where they dress up the Harker as an
alien and try to sell it to the people and so forth. In other words, if it serves a good purpose,
also like in the electronic democracy in a world between media is a good thing. If it's used
properly, would that be a media is a powerful is it is a powerful tool? It's a very powerful tool.
It's the most powerful political tool ever invented, among other things. And my attitude towards
that is the same as my attitude towards power power is morally neutral. The media is morally
neutral. It all depends on what you do with it. People, people do good things. People do bad
things. There are tools don't do good things or bad things. And this is just a very, very powerful
tool. That's why I've written books in which it's used for good and I've written books in which
it's used for evil. And I've written books in which it's used for both. And you'd probably say the
same thing about the treatment of science. Tool. That's why I've written books in which it's used
for good and I've written books in which it's used for evil. And I've written books in which it's
used for both. And you'd probably say the same thing about the treatment of science.
This is the tool like the media. Yeah, sciences. If you look, maybe that's the ultimate,
maybe that's what's ultimately wrong, the error of transcendental sciences, that they look,
is looking to science as a moral guide or as a, you know, as a guide for
the interest of philosophical or personal or emotional quest. I don't think science is supposed
to be that at all. Contrary to what I don't think that people's emotions or feelings or
fears are very good guides to scientific research either. I think science is there to
get out factual truths and create instrumentalities of physical power and that's what it does. And
it's not, it's again, it's morally neutral. It's what people do with it that counts. But if you
try and make science into a philosophy, science itself becomes your philosophy, then you really
have an empty philosophy because science is not designed or meant to deal with more philosophical
questions. Okay, one, one episode you had, it was a minor one, but it was in the world between
that impressed me. I'm sorry, right in a world between. You call this sort of utopia novel
already, at least on Pacifica, the planet. Royce's flying boat, he's out there, he's out there sailing,
first of all, looks like a regular sailing boat, and it's an idyllic scene in the islands and the
ocean and stuff. Then when he has to get back, it becomes a supersonic flyer in a matter of minutes.
That kind of blend of technology and the clean blue world was, I took that as a sort of a
meaningful thing. I'm not sure you meant it that way or not. Well, I mean, on Pacifica,
transportation is aesthetic. In other words, if you want to have to spend time traveling,
simply as you might as well enjoy it. That's why I hate to 55 mile an hour speed one.
I enjoy driving good cars fast, among other things like that. Yeah, I don't think that
technology is the enemy of a clean, well-run world far from it. Again, science is a tool,
if you understand it completely. So many people call themselves economists, as if it's a philosophy
or political orientation when it's really a name for a certain branch of science,
of which these people know nothing.
And the only way that you can have an ecologically sound,
soundly managed planet is by having a scientific knowledge of what that takes and what it is.
And by using the necessary technology to have a good human environment that doesn't conflict
with having a good natural environment. There's much more unanimity among the people who are
attacking the new wave as being a coherent school than there was among people who were being labeled
as a new wave. Okay, great. Yeah, that's the kind of thing we like to hear. The reading I've been
doing of your saying the locus and some writing interviews you've had and other publications
and so forth. You seem to be saying that the separation between science fiction and mainstream
is sort of an artificial thing that's been created by publishers and fans and so forth.
Would that be your position? Would I be correct in stating it that way?
Well, I would generalize it more. I think modern American publishing is all categories.
Everything is a category. Science fiction, westerns, bestsellers, literary books, they're all
categorized. There's no such thing as a general novel. Everything is packaged in a way to look
like something. How many times do you see a book that comes out that says bestseller? The book has
just come out, but it's labeled the bestseller because that's the category. There are many
unsuccessful bestsellers, strangers that may seem, because they use that as a category. It's a book
it means they do a certain kind of package, they promote it a certain kind of way,
and they want a certain kind of book and that's a bestseller. And a great many things that are
called bestsellers. So they're not really bestsellers. Same thing with so-called literary books.
Literary books are packaged in a certain way to appeal to a certain small audience,
to draw the attention of the people who do the New York Times book reviews,
and that's a genre too. It's not something that's simply been done to science fiction,
it's done to every kind of literature published in the United States today. Everything is a
category. But haven't you said though that like I got the impression in one of your columns that
you felt that science fiction wasn't being treated fairly, say by the book reviewers, the people who
could do it? No, it isn't. It is, you know, as a category, you know, it is treats very, very
unfairly and very cavalierly by the powers that be, which is mainly the New York Times book review
and the New York Review of Books and the so-called New York Literary Establishment, which really does
have a very heavy effect on the way books are published. These people, for instance, came down
on the American Book Awards, succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of the American Book
Awards. A real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was really bad to have
these awards given to things like science fiction, that it was bad to take it away from a small
jury which they could control and have thousands of people voting for. A very elitist, social fascist
bunch of people who I absolutely no use for and I'm sure they have no use for me. Well, they've
certainly demonstrated that. I've been mentioned in the New York Times Book Review twice, once
when the Iron Dream was in America, it was a National Book Award Recommendee. And once when I
was nominated for the American Book Award, neither of those books, which are forced to mention because
it was news, was ever reviewed in that rank. And I've forgotten the general attitude of these
people towards science fiction. Has a science fiction book or anything close to it ever won or
been nominated for consideration for the award that you know of? Well, a classic case was that the
National Book Award, our Leslie Fiedler won in my book. There were only three judges,
the three judge panel at that time. Well, Fiedler wanted it considered for the award and it was on
the initial list because of him. The other two judges refused to read it because it was science
fiction. They refused to read it. So that's that's that's how much chance you have of
of winning one of those awards in competition with other but they actually refused to read it.
I didn't find this out until years later when Fiedler was being interviewed on a Buckley show,
William Buckley show. And to all this story, I had no idea that that had happened, but it did
happen. Things may be a little bit different now, but they're probably not. You're talking sort of
packaging and categories here, but you think if this kind of packaging or a category approach to
literature were removed that science fiction would among, I don't know, scholarly people or whatever,
that it would have a higher reputation or it would be as equal to mainstream material?
Well, if categories were removed, there wouldn't be any categories.
And people would judge books not on what the content is, but how well it's handled.
I mean, it's pretty, you know, if you come to think, if you think about it, it's pretty
pretty unlikely to say that because you're writing about the future, because you're writing about
a world that isn't or using speculative material that necessarily all the books that are written
that way are going to be inferior to contemporary novels in terms of the writing, in terms of how
good it is. And if there weren't any categories, books should be judged on their relative qualities
and not on their content. What about Europe? I understand that you do very well over there,
your reputation. Do they do it differently? I mean, do they categorize that way too?
Well, they don't. France is my best country and that's a good example. And there, every book is
also categorized. In other words, they have what they call collections. Every publisher has
various collections of novels. They'll have a science fiction collection. What they'll have a
collection of so-called mainstream novels is something that is the collection of a particular
editor who even has a name on the collection. So this collection reflects this editor's taste
and it's labeled that way and it's given a name. So in a sense, everything is categorized. But there's
approbation between the categories. Since everything is categorized under a name chosen by the,
you know, to identify this line, this bunch of books with the editor was actually editing them,
there's not so much stigma, stigma, having a category because everything is that kind of
category. Although everything is categorized, the categories are a bit more equal. Also,
they give you a lot, you know, they have much more respect. They seem to, you know,
they understand that there's no particular, you know, that a lot of everything is crap.
But there's no particular reason why a science fiction novel shouldn't be as good as anything
else. It's still be a science fiction novel. It's that good. And so while they do still pay attention
to categories, they do not automatically discount something because it's science fiction.
I was talking to a friend of mine this morning who was over in Europe a few years ago and
he said, you know, that he'd noticed many books by, you know, you over their translations.
But yet he had not read you over here, which implied to me that you must be better known or at
least more appreciated. Well, I just came back from three weeks in France doing book publicity
in Paris and publicity for the record I made there. And, you know, I think not only am I,
not only do I think that I am more, you know, relatively more known in France than I am here,
but I think that writers in general are more important in France than they are here.
Writing is more, literature is more central to the popular culture of France, say,
than it is to the popular culture of the United States in general. People have a different
attitude towards, towards writing and towards writers. There's a certain generalized American
anti-intellectualism anyway. This does not exist in France. And in other European countries,
this, this, this atmosphere of anti-intellectualism. And so writers in general are, are, are, are
considered more important in science fiction. It's a different, it's a deep cultural attitude,
I think, that reflects partly the fact that my book is more popular there, partly the fact that,
that it's more important to be writer. Okay, what about this, on this question of
science, how it's considered by the, by the public and so forth. Do you think the movies
and television hurt the image of science fiction? I mean, to be treated as a serious litter?
Do you think they, they detract or hurt it?
Oh, I don't know. I don't think they, not really. I mean, the image of science fiction,
in that respect, has been very bad anyway. I don't think the movies really add to the
image of science fiction. I mean, I think they, they are not, they are not, they are
not, I don't think they detract from it either. If there are some better, more sophisticated
movies, they might help. As it is, it's just kind of neutral publicity, people more aware that it
exists. I think it's positive, and it will prove to be positive in the long range, because a lot
of people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction, with which they are unfamiliar
through these movies. And now if you look at the evolution in the movies, you find that in
the earlier science fiction movies, if you're going into space or whatever, you had to spend
like half an hour setting the thing, this is a spaceship, it takes off from the earth,
people float around it, you know, and you have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar
imagery. Now they can just start a movie bang right off, in a galaxy far away. Boom. Here's a
spaceship in the stromo pow, you know, in other words, the first half hour of the conventional
old prime science fiction movie is gone, because people are now familiar with this
imagery. And I think these movies have brought a lot of new people into familiarity with these
images. They made these images part of the popular culture. These movies are mainly aimed at kids
and adolescents. And years from now, assuming that these people ever read anything, they'll be ready
to read science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're ready to read literature of a
more serious kind or a lot, because they'll be familiar with the material, familiar with the
literature, it won't seem strange and weird to them, because they will have grown up with it.
That's why I think magazines, even magazines like Star Wars, in that sense, will have a
long term positive impact. Okay, listen, David.
Okay, why did why did you want the job as president?
Why did I want the job as president? I don't know. That's really a hard question to answer. I don't
know. I was somebody who had to do it, because I thought I was the most qualified person to do it at the time.
Because I've been involved in the organization until the beginning. I've been vice president.
I've been the grievance chairman. And I've always, sometimes, felt that it was going off in wrong
and stupid directions. And finally, I felt that there were a certain number of things that I could
get done in this period, and then this was the time to do it. I always felt I was the president of
things sooner or later. And this just seemed to be the right time to do it. Jack Williams had been
president, and he had dealt with a lot of internal bickering and things like that, which I wasn't
interested in dealing with at all. I think one of the flaws of the organization had always been that
it was too inward looking, and I wanted to see it more outward looking. So we have to jack it,
dealt with the good deal of organizational stuff. I felt it was a good time for me to come in and
change the emphasis. Okay, could you just tell me a little bit about what kind of things would
you be interested in doing or changing? Well, one thing that I'm already halfway from getting
done is the internationalized, is to have an overseas region with an overseas director on our
board of directors. It's a science fiction writing and publishing really isn't...